And John's just being called in.
Yeah, he's in there. Just camera. Okay. Right, we get him.
John
Koto.
Yeah. Hi John. Uh, do you, do you want
to turn your camera on or, uh,
Sorry. Difficult
Look. Welcome, John.
Um, we're just gonna resume
after, uh, our lunch break.
Um, we've got you down for five minutes.
We've got your submission, so you can take that as red.
If you want to highlight anything, go for that.
Uh, I'll give you a call with about, uh, two minutes to go.
Uh, just in terms of, um, we always like asking questions,
so, um, it gives you an idea of, uh, the timing,
so away in your hands.
Okay. Kira Koto, thank you for the opportunity.
Um, I'm submitting in support of the bill,
and I think that it's good for increasing housing options
and affordability for people, especially in the outside.
The urban areas would just make a
note, which I'm sure the committee is all aware of, that
if there are certain things to be deregulated,
it's important that there's not a loss of protection
for the homeowners, that there's not a detriment
to public safety and there's environmental responsibility,
and I suppose to be constructive
and probably being mentioned
before that the work should be performed
by licensed building practitioners,
registered architects, et cetera.
And a contentious issue probably,
that there should be a national insurance scheme, so
that rather than any failure
or defects, the remediation of the same, falling
to the professionals concerned,
they should have sufficient long lasting insurance.
Because I think it's unfair, like the changes
to the building act a few years ago, that the councils
and the rate payers bear the cost
as the last person standing.
So I think that's an important thing,
which the committee is no doubt well aware of
and will turn their expertise to.
Um, and I think the protections in the building act like the
implied warranties, the certifications
that these are safeguards that need to be retained.
And there also I think, needs to be clarity
for the average person when these changes are brought about
and implemented so that they're aware
and they fully understand,
because many will be like myself with not much
of a technical expertise,
but a concern in the fact that when we do something,
it's lawful and it's safe and it lasts.
Then there's the environmental issues, I suppose,
like making sure there's adequate disposal of the wastewater
and the infrastructure can cope.
And in a rural setting, this is probably more relevant to
septic tanks than actually, um,
infrastructure wastewater and sewage.
And maybe my final point, so you don't probably need
to give me the notice, the, um, guidance
or model bylaws so
that when councils are setting district plans,
that they've got some sort of
national guidelines to go with.
And I think this reduces the duplication so
that rather than each district authority
figuring out their own, if, if there's clear guidelines
or even a model that they could adopt, that again,
saves rate payers having to be at the brunt
of additional costs, especially, um, in the selwyn district
where the rates are going up horrendously.
So thank you for listening.
That's my submission, and I'm happy to take any questions.
John. Thank you. We've got almost two minutes left.
Uh, Scott, first question.
Thank you, John. Um, so I guess one of your points is
that you, you suggested we need a national insurance scheme
for, um, local building, uh,
licensed building practitioners.
Do you see this as being government funded so that,
because, um, we've heard about the, the challenge,
potential challenge of getting insurance for, for these,
these structures.
So do you think this should be government funded?
That's the first question. And the second one,
I guess is the, um, the, the concern
that some have expressed about
territorial authorities being seen as the, the authority of,
of to who will be ultimately responsible if a,
if a building practitioner is no longer there to,
to answer for problems for challenges down the line.
And yet they haven't been able to do a,
a, a close look at things.
So risks there.
Are you suggesting that they need to
issue a consent of some kind?
Um, to start with the second point first, no,
but I do think that there,
there should be an insurance scheme
and know it shouldn't be funded by the government.
It should be funded by the, um,
licensed building practitioners, the architects,
the engineers involved somehow rather.
And then at the end of the day,
it's obviously the homeowner who's getting the minor
dwelling that's going to pay that,
but I think that's fair enough because they get a benefit.
So they should be the, um, payers of the protection.
And yes, it just seems unfair
when rate payers get landed as the last resort
because with the leaky homes
and the number of architects, builders, et cetera,
who went into liquidation and abdicated any responsibility
and then left it to the poor rate,
payers are doing their best in these hard economic times.
So I really do think that's a key issue that should be
resolved or some clear guidance given Scott,
John, thank you. We've,
we've come to time.
Um, but um, just having had 30 years of, uh,
experience in local government, um, I could echo
what you just said about rate,
pay liability, horrible, horrible thing.
Right. Okay. Cool. Thank you very much.
Uh, we've got now, Simon.
Thank you. Welcome. Thank you, John.
Really appreciate it. So Simon,
we've got you down for five minutes.
Again, you can take your submission as read.
If things you wanna highlight, then go for that
and, um, hey, we are in your hands.
I'll give you a call about two minutes to
Go. Okay. Thank you
very much for the opportunity
to make an all submission.
Um, the one
or two of the points that I've, um,
had in my submission I see are all covered in sec,
the proposed section 42 BI think it is.
Um, so they're a bit redundant,
but, um, yeah, the, it's more concern
to do with making sure that, um, uh,
when these dwellings are, are built that, um, the,
the homeowner is is,
or the, the, the, the property owner is there for a position
to be able to, um, gain insurance on these dwellings.
And, um, it's a case of if you put something up
and then it's found to be inadequate, then um, some,
there's a lot of wasted money there.
Um, so it's just to make sure that these pe um, the,
the people are following the, following the rules as it's,
as the construction's going ahead,
because insurance companies love to let say, love
to lend you a raincoat and make sure you don't get it wet.
Um, um, nice
Terminology.
Um, and the other thing is,
I was surprised at which I haven't covered in my submission,
but it sort of like struck me that, um, 70 square meters,
which is the proposed upper limit for this, um,
the standalone small buildings that was the size
of my mother's two bedroom house in tacky,
and I wouldn't call that small, um,
at a very large, very large lounge, two bedrooms,
which both took double beds, kitchen, um, inclusive,
and, um, bathroom with laundry included.
So, um, that is not my idea of a small dwelling.
Um,
so questions.
Okay. Right, Simon?
Um, I, I'll, I'm gonna kick off with two
and then I'll, um, then I'll go to Scott.
Um, first one of those is just, um,
if 70 is not the right number, what is and why?
And the second question is just in terms
of the insurance we've had, we have had, um,
submitters already today saying the absence
of a council stamp on, um, saying this is, you know,
this is okay, means that both banks and insurers get nervous
and say, no, we don't really wanna be involved in that.
So, um, you said
that these changes should simplify access to insurance.
Their suggestion is actually makes it more difficult.
So can you, can you explain your thinking on
that one too? So too, sorry,
Sorry. The, um,
no, the, it's more a case of make sure
that the council's involved for the insurance side of it,
make sure the council's involved
before the actual building's in place,
the structure's in place such, so as the, um, uh,
if the council's satisfied, then the,
that the dwelling's being compliant
and is in all the right places, um, then,
then getting insurance should be, shouldn't be a difficulty
because then, uh, the insurers are going, oh yeah, well,
the council satisfied then. Yeah.
So what is the council being satisfied mean, um,
Council satisfied that the structure can put the,
the structure will comply with, say, slipping hazard
or, um, natural, any, anything that needs
to be mitigated against natural hazards.
I live in a slipping hazard zone, um,
that it's not over an easement, um, isn't gonna be cited,
uh, isn't accidentally cited across a boundary.
Um, okay. So
Right. And the size,
Um, size, um, 50 would seem,
um, okay, because,
Okay. That's okay. I'll,
I'll go to, I'll go to Scott then to ask
A question. Uh, yep. Thank
you. Um, I guess very similar question,
but on the insurance, do you think there's something
that's needed in this bill to ensure that
dwellings like this can be insured?
How do you, how do you see insurance being able
to be achieved for these types of dwellings?
It's, um, well,
You or you or do you think it's just, it, it will happen
because of the way it's written,
Um, as the way it's written at the moment?
No, I don't think insurance would be, would, uh,
would be easily obtained.
Um, it's just sort like, um,
the council should be the, sorry,
the consenting authority should be,
um, included in the process.
So the dwelling is, doesn't come as an a isn't,
isn't notified to the council as an afterthought.
So it's, um,
Okay.
I mean, there shouldn't be that many strictures,
but it's just like, yeah, it's,
it meets the national standard or whatever that standard is,
and that's like tick.
Thank the job. Okay. Simon, thank you very much.
Really appreciate your time
and really appreciate the submission.
Thank you. Okay, we
have now got Sky welcome.
Thank you. Good to have you here again.
You've, you've heard we've
got five minutes, we've got your submission.
You can take that as red, uh,
and, um, you know, I'll give you a call
with about two minutes to go if you're still speaking,
and, um, we will, as you said, look,
we look forward to asking questions. Okay.
Thank you very much. 10 Coto
constrained by the time provided.
I'll be brief. I'm here to call attention again
to the same issues we've already raised in detail
through two prior submissions.
The problem is not technical, it is avoidance
and timidity at the national level.
The proposal as it stands,
signals reform, but cannot deliver.
It promises relief,
but breaks that promise through omissions
and a failure to override local obstruction.
As the proposal stands in urban zones,
three dwellings are permitted on lots of an eighth
of an acre, but in rural families will be limited
to one MRU on lots of 300 acres.
That is not planning logic.
It is discrimination to the benefit
of unaffordable developers
and poorly managed councils encoded as national policy.
MRU are small, single story, low impact and necessary.
They pose no threat to rural amenity.
Don't let local overlays intend to constrain expansion,
often disguised as ecological or amenity claims.
Rob real citizens of the chance to remain on their land
and build intergenerational support.
Mru are not speculative developers. Avoid them.
They're built only by families in need.
When someone falls ill returns home
requires care or assistance.
Yet this proposal leaves them trapped caught
between the commercial clutches of councils
and developers of apartments they can't afford, don't want,
and they don't come with fanau and without care.
If local councils can continue
to block a family from digging a pad,
creating outdoor space,
because the MRU is small, forming a track to get to it
or installing a septic tank
because it, they're expecting a primary health first,
and they should have this by right engineered if required
by the zone, then they can block the MRU itself
and all change with it.
It's that simple. We don't just recommend change,
we implore you take the singular opportunity to do
what only national law can do, override, obstruction, enable
by right families, make this reform real
Sky. Thank you very much. Um,
questions?
Look, can I, can I ask you one? Yeah.
And it's, um, from a planning point of view Yep.
And of course this is, this is not about planning,
this is about building consenting,
but from planning point of view,
when does rural cease to be rural?
In other words, you know, how many properties could you
or how many MOUs could you put on a, a property
before you say, well, it's actually, it kind
of no longer looks rural fair enough, no longer feels rural.
So, um, the average, uh,
size of a, uh, home, uh, home, uh, uh,
living style farm in New Zealand is four hectares.
Mm-hmm. Uh,
that is 80 times larger than a city situation.
Mm-hmm. And the city is saying it's three.
So we're talking about that if one per hectare, it's more
or less a 60 times as large.
I believe that's enough of a distinction that we don't need
to have the visibility for the whole peninsula
of were removed from all houses and dwellings of people.
These are very little buildings.
They're able to be colored into the natural habitat
by the local, uh, design guidelines.
They do not take away the rural amenity.
They make it actually accessible.
It is currently to make a postcard is not rural.
A postcard is not living. This is the difference.
If people are trying to make a postcard of the rural zone,
rather than actually letting people live in the rural zone,
which they purchased for, to make farms
and live on with their families.
That is the distinction, that is the pushback that,
and I'm saying that, that the cities use this
to constrain the development to the city.
It decreases their need of cost to extend services
and forces the prices up by keeping it constrained.
That is the main part, is that both belong
to Wellington for, in this example.
Both are for living people, both are inhabited.
Both should have equal access to opportunity
to have family with them.
Sky. Thank you. I don't see any other, any other hands up.
So thank you very much.
Appreciate the submission and, um, thank you for coming in.
Okay. We've got Bruce Russell,
We're just calling for now.
Okay, cool.
Record next, doctor.
Good afternoon, Bruce. Yeah,
Bruce Andy Foster here.
Uh, chair of the
Transport and Infrastructure select committee.
Oh, yes. Hello, how are you? Hello. Good.
We've got, I've got, I've got a group, Andy, so,
um, sorry, sorry.
Just try and, um, be as quick as I can
and as brief as I can. But anyway, carry
On. Just before we, before
we start,
we've got you down for five minutes.
Um, I've got a group of colleagues who are with me on Zoom
so they can hear what you've got to say.
Uh, sounds like we can't see you, but that's okay.
Um, if you wanna leave some time
for questions, we appreciate that.
Um, so I'll give you a call with about two minutes to go.
Um, if you're still, if you,
if you're still going, so in your hands.
No, that'll be right. Just get, um, I'll talk,
but if any anybody wants to say something, just tell 'em
to talk quite slowly to me so
that I can hear them. That's the only thing.
Okay. Way you go. It's just one of these disabilities
as you get older, you know, these things happen.
Bruce, keep, keep going.
If you can speak to your submission, please.
Sorry, if you can speak to your submission, please.
Otherwise, we're gonna run out of time
before we've even started ready to go.
Yes, very much so. Okay.
Firstly, I support the Bill's intent
and increasing housing supply and afford and affordability.
Nothing that deregulation must come
with adequate safeguards for the public.
Two issues. Loss of protection without building consent.
Without a building consent.
Home owners may lose legal practitioners
and oversight, risk of non-compliant
or substandard bills limited, uh, recourse
for owners if things go wrong.
I asked that safeguards be embedded in the legislation.
Three safeguards recommended mandatory use
of licensed building practitioners in LPCs
who must carry compulsory insurance.
Written building contracts and disclosure of risk.
Implied warranties must still apply even if no consent
post-construction certificate of work
or compliance statement.
Four, reducing cost
and increasing access to affordable housing.
Removing the consenting process costs
and delays is positive for one.
First home buyers downsizing retirees
re relocatable transitional housing.
I strongly support removing red tape
for dwellings under a set size example, 70 square meters.
Five. Clarification building costs still applies.
Exception is for consent, not compliance.
eSafety elements must remain enforceable.
Structure for fire safety with a tightness.
Earthquake resilience.
I support a public register of pre-approved designs
for easier compliance.
Fix. Environmental and pending considerations.
Ensure consistencies with Research Management Act
and local plans.
As council needs tools to manage one wastewater
and stormwater are amenity impacts.
Four, I mean, uh, uh, seven. Conclusion.
I support the bill
and with appropriate safeguards, balance,
flexibility with legal and safety.
Two minutes to go responsibility.
I encourage, encourage the committee to ensure clarity
enforcement mechanisms and public trust and safety.
Thank you for the opportunity,
Bruce. Thank you very much.
Uh, check with my colleagues
to see if they've got any questions.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Okay, Scott. Thank you, Bruce.
Um, I'm a little bit un unclear.
I've heard you say that you think that buildings of 70
and under should need a consent,
and yet you've also said that you think
that we don't need a consent.
Which way are you leaning on this? You support the billing.
What I'm saying there, the consent still must, um,
you know, while I'm quite happy that if the person
considering the consent is okay, as long
as it meets the criteria,
because what you're saying is in your format was the fact
that it must be built of light materials, et cetera,
and still conform.
And as long still that is as is currently,
that it will get insurance.
I believe that consent then shouldn't, um,
shouldn't be a problem.
But the consent, whatever must still meet the requirements
of what is is, is going to be the policy.
And so your, your understanding is that the responsibility
for delivering that should be
with the territorial authority,
the local council. Is that, is that correct?
Yeah. Yeah. That would be correct. Yeah. Thank you.
That would be, but again,
but again, it's, it's the cost currently
of getting that consent.
Like as you said in in your summaries
that you sent us originally, you,
you're looking at about four
and a half thousand dollars for a consent.
Right. Thank you, Bruce. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate that.
No, look, I appreciate your time for being able
to make a, um, a submission. No,
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. All the very best here.
You too. Okay, we've got one. Ah, yep. Yep. Okay. Right.
Okay. Ah, Dan, nice to see you.
Nice to see you, Mr. Cheer. Thank you for, for having us.
Yeah, no, that's, that's a pleasure.
Um, our usual, uh, usual process play.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call with about, say four to go,
just in terms of for questions.
I know you, you always like asking questions, so, uh,
can be assured that we do too.
Uh, any, anything you wanna highlight, uh,
and your time as they say starts now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And can I also acknowledge, uh,
other members of the city committee?
I, I'm Dan Gordon, the mayor of We,
and with, uh, me as Aaron Hayes, the Council's Building,
building Unit, um, manager.
Uh, just a few points about, just to say
as an introductory remarks
that our Y Macary district is the fourth largest
territorial authority in the south island.
We are located north of Christchurch in sheer boundaries
with Christchurch City, uh, as well as Selwyn
and Nui districts.
And about a year ago, we, um, enjoyed the,
uh, hosting of you, Mr.
Chair, uh, in our district.
So, and you're always welcome as there's any member
of parliament to come and see what we're doing here.
Um, uh, our district ranges from urban townships such
as rung y and to, to the remote high country farms,
uh, of the Lees Valley.
60% of our residents live in the district's four largest
towns, and another 6,000 live on rural
residential lifestyle blocks.
Y ery has been the growth district for decades,
and there is a lot of interest for development here.
Between 1996
and 2023, our population has doubled and,
and this high growth trend is expected to continue, uh,
for the next, uh, 20 years.
Indeed, I've been elected member for most of that time
when I was first elected.
We are at 38,000.
Our district now sits at 74,000 in terms of population
since making our submission on the bill,
the council has recently, as in last week,
finalized our proposed district plan that will enable
between 14,000
and 17,000 dwellings to be built, uh,
over the coming 30 years.
And we've included in that as a Tier one council, medium,
uh, MDRS requirements as, uh, we were required
to, uh, by law.
Um, that's a bit of momentous decision for us, uh,
in making, uh, that,
and we will be publicly notified in the next,
uh, week or so.
And then hopefully with few, with as few, uh, appeals
as possible becomes operative.
Uh, I, I I say with, um, base breath, um, you like
our council position.
Uh, the council supports the overall purpose of this bill,
uh, particularly the intention to make it easier
to build small standalone dwellings under conditions,
including that councils must be notified prior to
and on completion of the building work.
We specifically support the following aspects, the intent
of the bill that will lower housing costs
for small standalone dwellings.
We think that's a really great outcome.
Increasing the maximum size
of the initial 60 square meters in the discussion document
to 70 square meters, we also think is a really good outcome.
Excuse me. Um, the use of the project information,
uh, memorandum or PIM that would notify the council,
but involve less process time
and costs in the building consent.
We had suggested the use
of PIMS in our first written submission on this matter.
So we're really pleased to see that
that's been incorporated.
While we support the intent of the bill, we just wish
to highlight the significant work
that we have already undertaken, uh, over the last,
over several years to accommodate our growing community.
And particularly we support a larger maximum floor area than
what is proposed in the bill.
Our recently finalized district plan had increased the
maximum from 75 meters squared to 80 meters squared,
or 90 meters squared, as outlined in 0.1, 0.3
of our written submission.
In this latest version of the district plan,
we've also removed the requirement
for the secondary dwelling to be located within 30 meters
of the main dwelling, noting
that we have approximately 6,000 rural residential
or rural lifestyle blocks in the district
that would benefit from greater flexibility.
We've also removed the one kitchen per dwelling,
per dwelling rule that will better support extended family
living arrangements.
And I personal experience with this, with, uh, family that
resided in our own home, uh, as we were growing up
and we couldn't have more than one kitchen under the roof.
It's been a change that I've personally pushed
because I, I think the council should get,
and government should get out of under people's roofs except
for, um, uh, making sure that they, uh,
meet the building code,
but the rest is up to them in how they live.
Uh, in my personal view, uh,
when preparing the written submission, we made an assumption
that the Ministry for Business Innovation
and Employment will provide guidance
to support the legislative changes, similar
to helpful guidance previously prepared by the ministry
to support changes, uh, in the building sector.
We highlight the importance of this guidance
and suggest that this be released as close
to when the bill is passed, as is practical
to allow councils in the building sector to prepare
for this change in existing requirements.
We just wanna make sure it's as smooth as possible
and for everyone to be on the same page.
We do also want to highlight the use of the pim, uh,
requires further consideration
to ensure the PIM process is manageable, robust,
and beneficial, uh, to all parties,
particularly to clause eight.
Reducing the timescale for council
to issue a PIM from 20 to 10 days.
Owners will, uh, likely have a shorter timeframe
through the PIM process than the
current building consent process.
And PIM applications will not require the same level
of detail as a building consent application as a council,
uh, that's issuing this
and works in this space, just say 10 days is not realistic.
Dan, Dan, we've got four minutes left. Yep. Thank you.
Um, I'm coming to my concluding points now anyway, um,
in conclusion, we are looking, looking forward
to these legislative changes,
potentially having higher uptake of smaller dwellings,
offering a greater level of housing choice in Yma
and across the country.
We thank the committee for their time
and the opportunity to speak today,
and we're happy to take any questions.
And so clearly I'll hand them over to Aaron
because he's more expert than me. Very good,
Thank you very much. Well, we've
got two, uh, two hands up.
So Cam and then Tangi.
Uh, thank you chair. Uh, thank you Mr. Mayor as well.
Um, look, uh, this has been
a great submission you've put in.
I enjoyed reading it. The part that I've questioned about is
how does the 10 days, uh, impact the,
the 10 days period impact?
Why? I would've thought like the things
that are needed in a PIM are generally held on council, um,
databases in a lot of ways in this modern age
of information technology.
It seems a surprise that considering we've got computers
that do these things, um,
amalgamating it could take 20 days.
So could you tell me why you think 10 is too
small, too short?
Aaron, who's, who's practically, uh, dealing with this?
Okay, thank you. Um, yeah.
So, uh, there's a difference between a limb, which is us,
um, retrieving information and council system
and providing it to someone about a property
and a PIM where somebody provides a proposal to us
for a building project that they have,
and we have to assess that against certain rules.
So this bill proposes that council makes a statement about
one, whether the, um,
proposal actually meets the exemption criteria,
and also, uh, whether it, uh, is subject
to any natural hazards.
And thirdly, um, a about whether any of our bylaws, uh,
are met or compromised by the proposal.
Now, those are three parts of a process
that we don't currently do with a standard Tim.
So we are being asked to do more in less time,
and we think that, uh, 20 days would be more reasonable
for us to undertake that work.
We're just being realistic about what we, yeah,
we think we can deliver.
The, the, um, the qualifying thing that would go for with
that is that if we are forced to do a PIM in 10 days,
we would have to have a pretty, um,
tough acceptance criteria
and would be kicking back a lot
of applications at the first post, um,
if they didn't meet certain criteria.
Another, um, part of that is that, you know, the,
the documentation that people provide to us
during a consent process, they provide that
because they know that council's reviewing it and,
and, uh, what they won't get a building consent if they
don't provide the right level of documentation.
The level of documentation they have to provide
for a PIM is not clearly defined in this legislation.
So it's quite likely that we may get very light
documentation and have to ask a lot
of questions when the PI's being processed as well.
Thank you. We've got a lot to a lot
of natural hazards here, which we've had,
and certainly post earthquakes, we've had a huge amount
of experience at dealing with this.
So we're just being realistic back to you in our suggestion.
It would make, we might as, let's make the process simple.
We agree with that, but just give us the right length
of time so we can do our job properly.
Thank you, Tanya. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Mayor. Um, my question was very similar to cams, actually,
um, around the timeframe.
And I was wondering, you know, your response there is
that it might be that more information is required in the
process of council, basically, uh, working through the,
the PIM being issued.
H how would you feel about a, a 10 day work,
a 10 working day, um, limit,
but the ability to extend that, uh, as exists currently
with other aspects of council if the
information is not forthcoming?
Or are you saying that that would effectively create some
false expectations?
Uh, it's possible that, uh, an ability could be
provided to put the application on hold
and the timeframe is suspended.
If we had to ask for further information.
But, um, effectively then that stretching out the timeframe
for somebody to receive a PIM anyway
would, and it's inefficient.
It would be far better for us
to receive high quality applications
and that it's very clear for property owners
and their, their consultants that are using
to provide the right information upfront
and we can, you know, process an issue
with PIM efficiently. Okay.
Ideally, and thank you for visiting yourself recently.
Um, um, uh, Tony, um, we we're a council
that has experienced at this.
If we turn them around quicker, we will do so,
but we are just asking for it to be realistic.
We, we think this is great, what's being proposed,
we just want it to practically work,
and that's our experience
and being a fast growing counselor, we're used
to keeping these things moving, uh, with the level of growth
that we're experiencing.
Um, so we, from, from on the ground, this is
what we would suggest back.
Okay. It, uh, brings us to time,
so thank you both very much. Always good to see you.
Nice, nice to see you too, Mr. Chair. Take care.
Good luck with your deliberate.
Thank you. Thank you. Right.
Okay, that takes us to Craig Atkinson,
Craig Kia.
Well welcome. We've got your submission.
Um, we've got you down for five minutes.
I'll give you a call with about two minutes to go, uh,
because we do like, like to ask, uh, questions
and, um, you can take it as read,
but if you wanna highlight things, that's all great.
And your time starts now.
Okay. Well, thank you very much.
Uh, yeah, for somebody who's built a 65 square meter
dwelling and lived in it myself
and stuff, I thought it were wonderful.
The one thing I would've improved was a little bit bigger.
Uh, it took the council a year to go
through the consenting process from white Zachery Council
and with design costs for about 25,000
and the most frightening experience that I've every level.
Uh, so yeah, I think there is, uh, down for major change.
And, uh, I would say construction comes down to the detail
and everything's in the detail,
and that's what we miss in New Zealand.
Uh, and I really wanna stress this to you, that you used
to be a world leader, uh, on sort
of books in education on dealing with the details.
Uh, and we've gone away from that,
that we just get academics sort of, uh, dribble that refers
to design elements,
and then builders of all levels have gotta
be able to decipher that.
In the early, uh, nine nineties, uh, 1990,
I were building half a million dollar, uh, sorry,
half a million pound houses
of basically four a one plans
that had all the detail in detail.
So I would say from scalability that
I don't think the ministry of business
and whatever they call themselves and standards
and brands could actually come up with three plans, that
that was actually made understandable at every level
of community, uh, that that covered within the details.
Uh, now anybody could go out and design anything else,
but if you just put three plans out, just basic plans of
what the things are, and allow it for any iwi, then
to pick it up and decide for how many they want to build
or anybody else, it's not brain surgery.
It reduces all the risks.
You can go through all the councils, you can deal
with all the b******t
and just look at what the details are
that people can actually build small wellings
that are affordable and, and sustainable.
Uh, and that's what we've, uh, since, uh,
Michael Joseph Savage, uh, and,
and social housing, we've gone away from, from, uh, what,
what housing can be in into million dollar mansions.
And, uh, businesses then look at themselves to, uh,
focus in different areas, Iwis, that are looking at sort
of housing their own people, uh, uh, a port
that basically they've gotta go
through the big building companies
that they're playing way over $4,000 a square meter, uh,
for complex, uh, buildings, uh, that we could be simplifying
that, that they could be training their own people,
that these plans could be like
they built at certain schools.
Like one in high school could be built across any school,
any iwi, any community project for homelessness.
Uh, and it had all be ticked off at the very beginning.
But like I say, I don't think you're capable of doing
that at any level.
Uh, and that's somebody
that's contracted in more than one country, even countries,
Germany, where it was all in a foreign country
in a foreign language, uh,
that was more understandable than New Zealand.
Uh, so yeah, there's a lot of work
to be done. I a minute and
Half left. Uh, Craig,
if you want to leave time, thank you.
A lot of the failures come through from your trade unions
and not representing trades.
They were formed at the beginning to actually break down
that people could better themselves
through trades and education.
Uh, and we've moved away from that,
that they represent civil servants
and they've, uh, we just ignored the issues within the
construction industry to go through a couple
of all boys clubs, uh,
that says add more problems
to an industry than they do good to be, quite honestly.
Uh, so yeah, we, we can present it better. We can scale it.
If you wanna scale it, you present the plans
and you let it be affordable, that councils checked off it.
If anybody wants to do anything different
and build their own thing, that's fine, but it's at a cost.
If you wanna scale it though, give them the plans
that are understandable at every level of community.
But from, like myself, a young dyslexic person,
I was six when I was taking a building site when I
described with dyslexia.
So it can be presented
and it can be trained through from an education perspective,
not your BCTI
or that's part of the problem also where you present.
Craig. Craig, you've got about 20 seconds left.
Yep. Thank you. Any questions?
Are there any questions of Craig? Craig?
Look, just there is one.
Uh, you, uh, in your written submission, you said, uh, two,
you, you were looking for government
to design a small standalone building.
You are aware that there are a large number of companies
around the country who, um, who do you know,
various standard type designs, uh, different sizes,
et cetera, which should all be compliant with, uh,
with this is, is that not sufficient?
No, no. Put it out from your government, from your, your,
your thing that goes through, uh, what the, uh,
council requirements are
and make it simpler, uh, from the things,
why should you have to deal with another
private organization?
I was a founder member of certified plans,
and I couldn't say a good thing about that organization.
Craig, thank you. Really appreciate your time. Yes,
Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you.
Okay, now we've got
Steve and Chris Watson,
who I did see momentarily there on the screen.
Hi
Steve.
And I can see Chrissy in the background
there. Nice to see you.
Yeah, nice to see you too.
Good to see you. Right. We've
got, we've got your submission.
You can take that as read.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, and I will let you know when we've got, uh, four minutes
to go and, um, time is yours.
Thank you. Okay, great. I'll read this out.
So we are Chrissy
and Steven Watson from Longly Station Trust.
Our family owns over 600 hectares
of rural land across 12 titles,
just 12 minutes from Wellington, CBD.
Many of these titles are over 50 hectares each far larger
than any suburban lot yet we are legally restricted
to one house per title.
Regardless of how much land,
infrastructure or need there is.
Our land has been intentionally crippled by
targeted district plan rules
and multiple restrictive council overlays,
including landscape, significant natural areas, hazards,
coastal environment, Maori precinct, hilltops,
and ridge lines, outstanding natural features.
These overlays and rules have been stacked without
transparent process, consultation,
or proper review pathways.
In effect, they create a development freeze, even
for modest sustainable homes as proposed by the spill.
So we strongly support the spill
because it recognizes a basic truth.
Not all homes are the same.
A small standalone off-grid dwelling on a 50 hectare rural
block is not the same as a high-rise apartment.
Healthy homes compliant tiny homes, cabins,
and small standalone dwellings should not be treated like
complex urban developments.
These homes are often off-grid,
always environmentally sensitive
and support multi-generational living, housing,
affordability and resilience.
But under current rules, it's easier
to build a high rise in central Wellington
and a modest second dwelling on a hundred hectares
of land in rural Wellington.
That's absurd. Wellington is one
of the most size seismically exposed cities in the world.
A large earthquake is not a distant hypothetical.
It's forecast. And in the first five minutes
after a major quake,
high density city zones will lose water, power,
sewage, and road access.
High rise living becomes vulnerable, isolated unsupported.
Infrastructure dependent housing will fail rapidly.
But in contrast,
decentralized rural land like ours can provide clean water,
solar power, waste processing space for temporary housing
land for food production and recovery staging.
Yet we legally prevent it from using this land
for resilience because district plan rules overlays
and zoning treated as untouchable.
Wall City council offices have already told us
that council intends to resist any government legislation
that allows additional dwellings in the rural area.
There's also a bigger picture here.
There's no shortage of land for housing in New Zealand.
It's an ideologically enforced scarcity.
Our land is blocked from supporting even low impact housing
because of the globalist planning model
that pushes people into compact city zones,
disregarding the inherent dangers of doing so.
Legislation that empowers decentralized rural living
promotes natural disaster resilience.
So we ask parliament to use this bill to unlock real change
and strengthen it by allowing multiple small homes on larger
rural titles, especially when off grid with small footprints
prevent councils from using overlays
and district plan rules to sidestep the intent of the spill.
Councils do not need to be involved
where owners take full responsibility for simple builds
and any building is identified on the property limb.
As such, create national consistency.
So every rural landowner in New Zealand isn't at the mercy
of a local council ideology
and make small standalone dwellings in the rural area.
An option, part of both our housing
and civil defense strategy.
This bill is a step in the right direction,
but for it to work on the ground,
it must override all constraint, local authority powers
that are being used to shut down common
sense housing solutions.
So we're asking to be enabled by this bill to house
our generational families to care for our land,
and to prepare our community with truly affordable
and resilient housing.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, can I ask a question?
Uh, hang on mate. Just we'll just get this.
Steve, are you finished as well?
Uh, yes, I have that, that's Chrissy's read that part,
but I'm here to answer, answer any questions.
Good. Right. Okay. We'll go to go to questions. Right.
Um, who wanted to ask a question, right?
Sorry, you were, uh, you were momentarily off the screen.
There was a voice from the heavens way you
Go. Um, thank
you to you both for your submission.
Um, just wanting to clarify, um,
you spoke very evocatively about, um, many
of these situations which are already, um, in place.
You know, there are many of these sorts
of dwellings which would be compliant with this bill,
but they were built a decade ago.
Um, how do you suggest that this bill should deal
with existing dwellings?
Good, good question. I think, I think what needs
to happen right across the board throughout New Zealand
is there needs to be more owner responsibility.
Um, so what I mean by that is that if owners
take responsibility for these builds, then
that would then be recognized, uh, on the li property limb
for anybody buying the property in the future.
Um, the, the owners would also be responsible for, uh,
insurance if they want insurance.
Um, and I,
I think really you can't have your cake and eat it too.
You, you, the council can't be, um, still responsible.
They can't be respon, the council can't be responsible
for these builds, if, if, if we, if we truly want freedom
to be able to build them, um, without council interference.
So yes, it's, it's, I think it's a,
it's a step in the right direction.
I think it's a, a direction that we need to do
with building throughout or throughout New Zealand.
More owner responsibility councils have
to move somehow away from, uh, the responsibility
that they hold at the moment.
Uh, they are always the last man standing.
Um, and, and something has to be done about that.
One question from me, um, Steve
and Chrissy, and thank you.
Um, we've got three submissions, at least the written form
of those submissions is the same.
They're normally when we get those, they're postcard size.
These ones are quite lengthy and quite, um, uh, detailed,
but the fact is they're all the same.
Um, so, um, is, is that the case that the number
of you have actually sort of collaborated
to bring the same submissions together?
Or is that, we've got some administrative error here.
No, no, no, no, no. They, they,
they probably are similar in that we, we have been
battling council on very similar issues as a community.
Right. As a rural community.
So this is, this doesn't just affect us,
us we're just an example, um, of how the best intent
of, of this bill
is not gonna find its way onto the ground in a,
in the rural area of Wellington.
So just, just to be clear, Skye, Al
and Matt Rutledge, who's coming next are Yes.
Are you, you are all known to each other
and you all have, um,
you've all come up with the same submission?
Yes. Okay. Just, just wanted to check that. So No, no,
No. It won't be the same submission.
I think the, I, I have seen what Skye has written
and I, I agree with it.
It's not entirely, uh, what our submission is. Okay. Very.
I think his focus is correct. Very similar. No, that's
Okay. That's okay. Just, just
just for clarity. Right.
Are there any other questions? No,
look, thank you Steve and Chrissy.
Good to see you again. And, um, always good to hear from you
All, All, all of you, Sandy.
Okay. Thanks very much. Thank you. Thank you everybody.
Cheers. Right. Okay.
We've got now Matt Rutledge
That Oh, just there.
Oh, Matt, sorry. You're in person. I was looking.
Yeah, no worries. Person instead person. Welcome.
Um, look, uh, we've got you down for five minutes. Yep.
Um, uh, you know, you heard the, uh, the arrangement.
I'll, um, let you know when there's a couple of minutes
to go and, um, you know, we, uh, look forward to
what you've got to say, and if you wanna leave time
for questions, that's always
appreciated too. So way you go.
Okay. So you've got my, you've got my room submission
and yes, it is the same as, uh, sky's written submission.
Right. Okay. Um, so we wouldn't,
I was not con I was not confused,
and they are, this is not
administrator. Okay, cool. Thank you.
So, uh, no problem. My name's, uh, Matt Rutledge.
Um, I'm from Wellington, New Zealand.
Um, yeah, I mean, uh, I think people need to,
the one question that I ask myself is why has this, uh,
legislation got so much traction?
This legislation has got so much traction
because of the, uh, state of, um,
housing from New Zealand at the moment.
Um, I'm from Wellington. I'm born and bred in Wellington.
Um, I walk down Courtney Place.
I see homelessness everywhere.
Um, and that you go to rural areas,
you're now seeing homelessness in places like Napier,
seeing homelessness and um,
places like Alpo, that's everywhere.
New Zealand used to be a country that was,
people could empower themselves
by building something to live in.
Um, you, you've, uh, only gotta talk to any
of your grandfathers or your grandmothers,
and they had a place where they could look.
It might not have been the best place.
It might have had sugar sacks for curtains,
it might have had a dirt floor, but they could live there.
What have we got now? And then we've had a
another rounded people.
The modern equivalent to that is tiny homes.
People have come up with these innovative ways
in which they can house themselves
and their families in this country that we live in.
It's not like we can get in a car and drive to Portugal
or Spain or some other country where it's easy to live.
We confined to these two islands.
Some of these people have criminal convictions.
They'll never get off these islands. That is their Alcatraz.
They have very limited fun money, very limited anything.
The way in which these, we can empower these people
to at least make a prosperous place for themselves
as empower them to build something for themselves.
On some land, they might have this land,
they might be inheriting it,
they might be something like that.
I know firsthand what it's like to deal
with the city council and to deal with compliance officers,
to deal with building inspectors
and to deal with people who actually have less
of an education about
what I'm doing than what I'm doing myself.
You talk to any builder, that's the way
I think that it's really important that this legislation
is put through and it enables people
to have these 70 square meter dwellings.
Yes, there need to be some guidelines and stuff like that,
but people should be able to, within reason, build
what they want on their property as long as it's safe, warm,
and to building code.
And when I say to building code, it's,
they should be able to build it anywhere.
Should be able to build it a rural environment.
They should be able to build it in a
residential environment.
They should be able to, as long as it's to code
and it's warm and dry to build a house.
We've heard various, uh, descriptions on
how much it costs to build a house.
You've got about a minute and three quarters. Yep.
No worries. Um, it's not that hard. It's not that difficult.
I think the other guy touched on it.
You know, I left school at 14 years old.
I went off, got my, uh, a mechanics apprenticeship
and turned around and, um, went into a world of finance.
I worked for the Central Bank just over the road
there at Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
I worked for the IODI worked for lots of places.
I thought myself how to build. I can build a house.
It's quite easy. It's not hard as long as you follow a code.
It's a book. Having the ability
to build yourself a 70 square meter dwelling on a house
that anybody can do it if they learn.
That's all I wanna say, really.
I just think you need to, you need
to look at why this legislation
has got traction in the public.
Like that's got traction in the public eye
because building has become so unaffordable
and incredibly hard to do due to red tape. That what, say
Matthew, thank you very much. We've
got just under a minute left.
Uh, are there any questions, Ken?
Yeah, yeah, actually, I just,
Who has a build on your jobs?
Previous jobs been described as easy, so Yeah, not
Easy. Oh yeah, no,
it's all good.
No, the, um, uh, I just, I had a quick, you, you,
you raised a, a few, um, uh, parallels or,
or connections between homelessness, disempowered people
and the unaffordability of housing.
Um, then you, you've also, uh, said, you know,
anyone should be able to build what they want as long
as they fit with the code.
Uh, I guess that is the point.
We have a code and somebody has to check
that it's complied with the code.
Yeah. How do you allow people
to build whatever they want and comply with the code?
Well, so that you don't end up with dirt floors
and drafty homes and you end up with H one
and that, I mean, on one hand you're talking about freeing
people to build what they want to empower themselves.
On the other hand, you're talking about complying with rules
to make sure we've got healthy homes.
How do you square those two?
Yep. Well, so if you are, um, building to, you know,
if people are, are building to the code, you've, uh,
if you can prove that you've built the place to, to code,
you know, by IE photos and um,
and stuff like that, I mean, every, all the bits,
all the work I've ever done, I've done with photos,
I've taken photos of it.
It's, uh, it's, um, you know, it's pretty easy.
Uh, it's not, there is, I mean, there's a, um,
there is a building code you can follow.
You just read it and go with it.
And if it's 70 square meetings,
I think other people have touched on it as well.
People need to take a bit of responsibility.
If you are buying something, you get a limb.
And if it's a 70 square meter, 70 square meter
or under building, probably the
thing shouldn't be on the limb.
Do you know what I mean? Or it should be, this is a,
this building hasn't been inspected by the council,
but people should be able to live in it if they want to.
Maybe they shouldn't. I would agree
that they probably shouldn't be able to rent it out,
that they should be able to live in it and,
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Cool. Matthew, thank you. Really appreciate it. Thank you.
No worries. Thanks guys. Okay,
we now have Ross Wakefield, who's with us with by Zoom
Afternoon.
Ross,
Yeah. Afternoon.
Um, We've, we've got you down.
We've got you down for five minutes.
Uh, you can take your submission
as read if you wanna highlight things.
That's great. Um, I'll, I'll give you a call,
a call when there's about two minutes to go, just to allow
for time for questions if you want to allow that.
But it is your time, so in your hands,
Uh, thanks chair. Thanks chair,
and the members of the committee
for the opportunity, um, to speak today.
And I appreciate the considerable
work that's gone into this bill.
Um, and appreciate the opportunity to contribute
to the considerations of the impacts.
Um, yeah, I support the intent
to improve housing affordability and availability,
but have some serious concerns around the risk posed
by the, the bill's.
Um, proposed removal of the consenting requirements
for the design and construction of onsite water supply
and wastewater disposal systems in particular, um,
the bill proposes exempting standalone dwellings up
to 70 square meters from the consenting system, as well
as the onsite water supply systems that may be needed
to support these buildings.
And this is quite a major shift
from the consultation the government ran in 2024
regarding the Granny Flats proposal initially,
which was explicitly maintaining, um,
or proposing to maintain consenting requirements
for onsite wastewater, stormwater
and water supply systems where there's no connection to
the network utility operator or public services available.
And so exempting those systems from a consent does introduce
real risk for public health, the environment,
and the safety of the building occupants.
Um, briefly why the consent process matters in this place.
I mean, the consenting process matters
to ensure there's independent oversight
and compliance with the building code for these systems,
which protects current
and future building occupants
as well as the building owners.
Um, removing that oversight risks or the built
or noncompliant homes
or hidden defects, long-term durability
and safety issues potentially
and can, could create loss of confidence from, um,
councils, lenders and insurers.
Um, particularly around the onsite water systems.
It's quite a high risk of these, uh, unregulated
or there's no independent oversight from
the consenting perspective.
I mean, onsite wastewater, stormwater
and water supply systems, they're complex,
they're site specific, um,
and they're not within the scope of work
that most li licensed building practitioners would design
or plumbers of drain layers were designed.
And if they're designed or installed poorly, they can,
they can result in contaminated water sources.
They can cause flooding
or contribute to flooding and land instability.
They can lead to unsafe drinking water, um,
and they can pose major public health risks.
So it is my recommendation
that these specific systems remain subject
to the building consenting process as was proposed in the,
um, the previous consultation in 2024.
Um, and if the bill proceeds,
I also recommended in my submission a couple
of other key changes, defining simple plumbing
and drainage clearly, um,
and making sure that excludes complex onsite supply systems
or wastewater disposal systems, ensuring that the, um,
the legislation's clear that connection
to network utility offer operator services for water waste
and stormwater are made where they're available
and there's clear obligations to engage
with the network utility operators that own those systems.
Um, another suggestion is to require independent points
of supply for water, um, to these standalone buildings,
just like the bill proposes for electricity and gas.
This is to overload the got two, two minutes left.
Boss overloading, shared connections. Okay. Thanks Chip.
Um, yeah, to avoid the risk
of overloading the water supply connections to the existing
buildings, um, for example,
if you built a granny flat at the back of your house
and you're connected to your existing water supply pipe
work, when people are running fixtures in that building,
if you connect to the existing pipe work
that may affect the fluorides in your shower when you're in
your building from another building and the likes,
so like electricity
and gas, recommend that water has an independent, um, point
of supply, also makes it easier for, um, metering
or apportioning any cost of the use
of water for these new dwellings.
And I also think it's really important that as well
as the record of works that are proposed for plumbers
and drain layers, that these include statutory declarations
of compliance for the plumbing
and drainage work associated with the exempt dwellings.
So the moment the bill proposes the provision of a record
of work, which is really just a record
that I did some work on this building,
but it's important that these also include a declaration
that the work complies with the building code
and the relevant legislative requirements, um, similar
to a gas certificate, for example, so that, um, safety
and compliance can still be verified.
So yeah, in closing, thank you for the time.
Um, definitely understand the drive to see faster
and more affordable housing delivery,
but exempting entire homes and high risk onsite water
and wastewater systems from the regulatory oversight does
risk undermining the very protection designed
to keep New Zealanders safe
and healthy that the building regulatory system provides.
So urge the committee to reconsider the extent
of the exemptions of the bill
and retain these critical safeguards
for onsite water and wastewater systems.
Thank you for the opportunity to present today.
I know I was rushing through it.
Thanks, Ross. Um, we might take a couple of moments, uh,
longer than, uh, than five minutes, uh, Arina.
Um, but if we can keep the questions tight, we'd be good.
And the answers too, right?
Great submission and I will seek, um,
advice from our advisors to, um, your points.
Um, my first question of two, um,
does a separate water meter
and a separate system add on costs?
And what would you expect that costs to be,
Um, a separate water supply connection?
Depend, it would depend on the situation.
I mean, if you needed to upgrade the existing water supply
pipe anyway to make sure it was large enough
to supply another dwelling, then the cost would be,
would be equivalent, which would be like the outcome.
So yeah, potentially does add some cost, um,
to get an additional water supply connection as opposed
to just connecting to an existing supply.
But it prevents an issue.
For example, like the example I gave affecting one household
by another household drawing water from it.
There, it probably wouldn't have been sized initially
for a residential lot as an example in the pipe work
for more than one house
And the declaration that the work complies with the code,
should that declaration, um, apply to anything else
or is it just the building code that you're interested in?
Uh, in my submission, I recommended it
covered a few particular things.
Okay. Um, I suggest that it covers,
that the work's completed in accordance with the design
and the specifications, particularly
for the practical work that the plumber's doing.
Um, and that it also records
that if they've made any variation from that design
and specifications, that that's been a agreed
and, um, by the designer and the building owner.
So the tradespeople aren't changing things on site without
some level of agreement from the designer
to make sure it fits with the design intent.
Um, as well as that the work complies
with all the relevant codes of the building code
and it that it falls within the scope of the exemption
and it's not work outside the scope of the exemption.
Um, and another key important part for these ones is
that the, the work is recorded, um, in an as-built plan.
Anything that's below ground so people can find these
plumbing and drainage services again in the future.
Thanks. Cam, do you have a question?
You're taking your hand? I,
I, I did, but um, I sort of got there,
but I was gonna just ask, um, would a producer statement,
um, suffice to replace record of building work, um, Ross
and to your satisfaction?
Um, I think producer statements are commonly used by, um,
by building consent authorities around the country
for this type of work.
And they usually do include a declaration
that the work complies.
Typically they, that complies with the building consent,
but there won't be one in this, um, this case.
Um, I think if a record of works being produced,
you could add a statutory declaration to that
or set one alongside that in a combined form.
Two quick questions from you if I can, uh,
Ross your background.
Um, you, you, you've got, um, war's, life, you know, um,
sitting in on top of this.
So clearly you've got a professional role here.
So just tell us us what that is.
'cause that's not, that wasn't clear in your
submission and second question. Go on. Yep.
No, I'm a, um, uh, plumber, gaster and drain layer
and have background working in construction design
and regulation.
Cool. Thank you. And the other one is, so, so
what you're saying is that the original consultation
document excluded sewage and wastewater
and now it's been included as being exempt.
Yes. Yeah. The original consultation proposed
for these onsite systems
that they were excluded from the exemption,
and that if you needed these, you would get a consent just
for those systems and particular situations
where you couldn't connect the network.
And that's changed now in the bill.
Okay. We will, we will ask for officials advice on, on
that and what happened and why.
Thank you very much. We really appreciate that.
Okay. Thanks all.
Okay, now we've got the CoLab,
got them there.
Yep. It's in the zoom. Yep.
Just, just about to come with the zoom.
Good afternoon, David. Good afternoon everyone.
You are, you're representing CoLab?
I am, yes. Yeah. Cool.
Okay, look, we've got your submission.
If, uh, if you want to, um, highlight any elements,
then please do, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
If I'll give you a call with about five to go, um,
if you wanna leave time
for questions, we always appreciate that.
So in your hands.
Yeah. Thank you Chair. Um, yeah, so, uh,
my name is David Sampson.
Um, thank you for the opportunity
to make an oral submission.
I'm speaking to the submission made
by the Waikato Building Consent Group being the combined
feedback of affiliated councils, Hamilton City,
Waikato District, ADA Piko district, hoki district,
Timko Man District, WAMO district, oat Honga district,
and WPA district.
Um, currently I hold the position
of building assurance manager at WPA District Council,
and I'm also the chairman of the technical committee
for the WTA Building Consent Group.
Uh, just reiterating that in principle,
our group supports the need to improve housing accessibility
and afford, um, affordability across New Zealanders.
Um, that being said, we do oppose this bill.
Um, and given the limited time available, um, I'll try
to summarize some of the background
behind our concerns raised in our submission.
Currently across the group building consents are
consistently issued within 20 working, um,
the two 20 working day statutory timeframe, um,
provided adequate information
provided this period's often significantly less
for simple projects such as small standalone dwellings.
The amendment proposes to remove the requirement
for the building consent for small standalone dwellings
under the addition of Schedule one A of the building act
with the addition of section 42 B three C prescribing
that no building work on these buildings may begin
before a PIM is issued under section 34, uh,
by the TA As well as a number of others.
The amendment also introduces changes to section 33
and 34 of the Building Act.
In the addition of section 35 A all in relation
to project information memorandums
or PIMS changes requiring the owner to submit
with the PIM application.
A description of building work along
with design plans requiring TAs
to issue a PIM within 10 working days in relation
to small standalone dwellings,
requesting additional information be supplied by TAs,
which provides advice on whether the proposed building work
is likely unlikely,
or whether it's unclear as to whether the characteristics
of clause one of Schedule one A are complied with
and requesting that we're applicable and assessment
and information be provided by the TA in relation
to natural hazards under Section 71 of the Building Act.
The risk with how these amended sections have been drafted
is that TAs may apply these sections
with significant inconsistency.
Um, currently PIM applications are reviewed
and issued by a member of the TA
with no regulatory requirement
for technical competency or qualification.
Section 35 A in particular alludes
to there being some responsibility on the TA
to provide advice on critical design features such
as overarching compliance with the building code,
finished floor levels, protection
of other property from fire, stormwater, et cetera,
and in excess in an assessment of Section 71 in relation
to natural hazards, these decisions would
otherwise be made by a member
of the building Consent authority, who is required
to hold an appropriate competency under BCA Regulation 10,
um, required to regularly undertake training under BCA.
Regulation 11 holds an appropriate qualification under BCA
regulation 18 and have their decisions monitored
through annual audit processes under BCA Regulation 17.
With the introduction of Section 3 92 A
removing the liability of councils
and providing this information with the pim, the risk is
that TAs will adopt a varying view on their responsibilities
with no overarching regulatory oversight, such
as an accreditation requirement to help monitor this in.
In addition, the risk that homeowners will rely on this
information being provided at the discretion of councils
with making, when making significant financial decisions,
um, could lead to unnecessary conflict
between councils and their communities.
Currently, our inspection failure rates
for building work under building consents range between 35
and 45% across the group.
This is a mixture of building work not being completed in
accordance with the consented plans
and required documents, either not being provided or being
provided incomplete or inaccurate.
This while knowing from the date the consent was issued
that they are required
and knowing that no CCC will be issued
until council is satisfied
that building work is completed in
accordance with the building consent.
The proposed amendment places the responsibility on their
owner to provide documents
to councils within 20 working days of completion.
This introduces the risk
that the work may never be considered completed
or not considered, completed for some time,
placing the onus on councils to follow up on issued PIMS
for these projects and potentially take enforcement action.
It also reduces the leverage available to councils
to support homeowners to obtain accurate
and complete documentation on completion without
taking enforcement action.
Additionally, connections to council assets such
as stormwater, waste water
and water networks will be uninspected by the council,
increasing the risk of cross contamination
and council owned assets, as well
as relating development contributions remaining unpaid.
The proposed amendment places significant responsibility on
building practitioners to complete the project in accordance
with the legislative standards.
Under the current scheme, notwithstanding the proposed
improvements to disciplinary processes
and publishing of the LBPs details,
whose licenses have been suspended,
we do not believe the current LBP scheme is robust enough
to give confidence that homeowners are not gonna be
negatively affected by the removal of the requirement
to obtain a building consent, particularly in terms
of what's required to obtain a
license and maintain a license.
When considering the advantages versus disadvantages
of these changes, it's difficult to
identify the tangible advantages
of remove removing the requirement of a building consent,
um, and replacing it with a requirement
to obtain a PIM only, which may
or may not contain all the information expected, may
or may not be issued within the expected timeframes.
Given council still holds the right to place the PIM
statutory timeframe on hold if it believes further
information is required.
Um, this decision will obviously depend on the individual
counsel's interpretation of Section 35 A.
The requirement to issue a PIM within the statutory
timeframe is not part of a TA's accreditation requirements,
and therefore runs the risk of not being managed
as thoroughly as a building consent
otherwise would, particularly for those TA's
with constrained resources, placing the responsibility
for ensuring compliance with the building code solely within
the hands of the licensed building practitioner who's,
who has a financial interest in completing the project
and placing the responsibility of on the owner
to ensure all documentation is completed, collected
and correct following the completion of the project.
Um, just, just finally, um, on that, if the bill was
to proceed as written, um, we would recommend
that section 32 B two, which currently prescribes
that our owner may apply
for a pim if the building work is in connection
with a small standalone dwelling, um, be rewritten
to align the section 42 B three C to read,
an owner must apply to a territorial authority for a pim,
um, for building work, if the building work is in connection
to a non non-consent
and small standalone dwelling, dwelling under Schedule one A
where no building consent is applied
for. Thank you for your time,
David. Thank you very much. Well
done. You are
just over three minutes to go.
So, uh, cam, first question,
Uh, yeah, I just had a question about the, um,
the worry about making sure the documentation, um,
and the as-builts come into the territorial authority, uh,
and the 20 days not being, um,
having the starting gate being the completion of work.
Do you think there should be a, from the beginning,
from the issuance of the pim perhaps?
So as soon as the project information memorandums issued,
there's a say 24
or 36 month clock would, um, solve that problem?
Yeah, I think there needs to be some,
some something else written in there
to help us manage, um, manage that.
It's pretty liberal at the moment
and I, I, I can see a significant risk in that not, um,
being followed through on, um, particularly given
that the onus is on the owner
to tell us when it's been completed.
Um, we aren't going out there to inspect a, um,
a building work in relation to a consent to, to monitor it.
So,
So finding something else. Okay.
Okay. Cool. Thank you. Any other questions? Anyone?
Can I just ask one because I think if I'm understanding you
right, David, you've raised the same issue about, uh,
wastewater, although it was slightly
different to the previous amount.
I dunno if you heard, um, yeah.
About wastewater having been in when it was consulted on,
uh, wastewater was not going to be exempt.
Now it is, is the way we're understanding it.
Um, and you, but you specifically raised it in terms
of connection to council systems. Can
You just council council networks?
Yeah. So, um, yeah, can
You just walk, walk us through that just a little bit?
It, it's probably, um, um, the more common that you,
that you think that an inspector will go out to inspect a,
a, a connection of a stormwater line, um,
to a council stormwater asset, um,
and find that it's actually connecting
to the wastewater line.
Um, and this, this is quite critical
to pick up on these are our assets that we need to protect
and ensure that they're, um,
they're not being contaminated or vice versa.
So are you seeing, I think, Are
You, sorry, are you seeing that this, um, means
that people will be off their own bat doing the,
making the connections to the council networks as opposed
to the council, um, having a process
That's that Yeah, that's the way I understand it,
that it'll all be signed off by the drain layer, um, as,
as self certifying.
Um, obviously there's no building consent,
so there's no inspection, um,
of those connections to those assets.
Um, and when your drain layer digs down, um, you know,
it may not necessarily be immediately obvious to them, um,
which pipe they come across, particularly if they're close,
um, as stormwater or, or wastewater.
So at the moment, at the moment, what you're saying is
that there is a process where the council checks that
The council checks that. Yeah.
And that, that, that would
change. It's your understanding.
Yep. That's my understanding. We,
We will get advice on that one.
Yeah. I'm, I'm well aware of my time on the council
for many, many years that, that is No,
That's, yeah.
Appreciate the time, um, to, to make an oral submission.
So thank you everybody, and uh, David, thank you
Very much. We appreciate their time
too. Thank you. Perfect timing too.